ZeRO-Inference blog (#2271)
microsoft/DeepSpeed: docs/_posts/2022-08-27-zero-inference.md

---
title: "ZeRO-Inference: Democratizing massive model inference"
excerpt: ""
date: 2022-08-27 00:09:00
tags: inference ZeRO
---

## Introduction

> The current trends in artificial intelligence (AI) domains such as image, speech, and natural language, demonstrate that model quality can be improved by increasing model size. In natural language processing, for example, the state-of-the-art (SOTA) model has grown from 300 million parameters (Bert-Large) to 500 billion parameters (Megatron-Turing-530B) in less than four years. However, this dramatic growth in model sizes has significantly increased the GPU cost to train, finetune or inference these models, making them unaffordable to many users. To democratize access to AI innovations, large organizations, such as BigScience, Meta, and Yandex have recently publicly released pre-trained massive models. Unfortunately, even these publicly available models are not broadly usable because many users cannot afford the dozens of GPUs required to fit them for inference computation. For example, half-precision inference computation on Megatron-Turing-530B (SOTA model for natural language) requires at least 40 A100-40GB GPUs, which is unaffordable to many students, model scientists, hobbyists, and small businesses that could benefit from using these powerful models. And so, a real concern is that if the dramatic increase in model sizes continues, then a growing fraction of users could be excluded from the benefits of these AI innovations. 

Reviewer: well, actually not sure whether it should be BigScience or HuggingFace - there is no BigScience organization (other than on the HF hub), so perhaps combing HuggingFace (BigScience)?

> The current trends in artificial intelligence (AI) domains such as image, speech, and natural language, demonstrate that model quality can be improved by increasing model size. In natural language processing, for example, the state-of-the-art (SOTA) model has grown from 300 million parameters (Bert-Large) to 500 billion parameters (Megatron-Turing-530B) in less than four years. However, this dramatic growth in model sizes has significantly increased the GPU cost to train, finetune or inference these models, making them unaffordable to many users. To democratize access to AI innovations, large organizations, such as BigScience, Meta, and Yandex have recently publicly released pre-trained massive models. Unfortunately, even these publicly available models are not broadly usable because many users cannot afford the dozens of GPUs required to fit them for inference computation. For example, half-precision inference computation on Megatron-Turing-530B (SOTA model for natural language) requires at least 40 A100-40GB GPUs, which is unaffordable to many students, model scientists, hobbyists, and small businesses that could benefit from using these powerful models. And so, a real concern is that if the dramatic increase in model sizes continues, then a growing fraction of users could be excluded from the benefits of these AI innovations. 

Author: Done

> DeepSpeed, a part of Microsoft’s AI at Scale Initiative, has developed the ZeRO-Inference technology to address these obstacles to AI democratization. ZeRO-Inference comes from the family of ZeRO technologies, which are a collection of powerful memory and parallelism optimizations for efficient large scale model training and inference on modern GPU clusters. DeepSpeed had previously developed ZeRO-Infinity, a technology that leverages heterogenous memory (GPU, CPU, and NVMe) to efficiently scale model training to extreme levels. ZeRO-Inference adapts and optimizes ZeRO-Infinity techniques for model inference. It is inspired by the observation that the aggregate heterogenous memory capacity of most commodity computing devices (e.g., laptops, desktops, workstations, etc.) is on the order of terabytes and sufficient to host the largest known models for inference computation. By leveraging this non-GPU memory, ZeRO-Inference enables inference computation of massive models (with hundreds of billions of parameters) on as few as a single GPU, thereby making massive model inference accessible to almost everyone.  Moreover, by replacing GPU memory requirements with CPU or NVMe memory which are significantly cheaper, it significantly reduces the cost of massive model inference, offering an affordable inference path to SOTA models. 

Author: Done

ZeRO-Inference offers scaling benefits in two ways. First, by keeping just one (or a few) model layers in GPU memory at any time, ZeRO-Inference significantly reduces the amount of GPU memory required to inference massive models. For current SOTA models which have about a hundred layers (e.g., 96 and 105 layers in GPT3-175B and Megatron-Turing-530B respectively), ZeRO-Inference reduces the GPU memory requirements by up to two orders of magnitude. For example, with ZeRO-Inference, GPU memory consumption of Megaton-Turing-530B for half-precision inference drops from 1TB to 10GB.  Second, by fitting the model into CPU or NVMe memory which are orders of magnitude cheaper than GPU memory, ZeRO-Inference makes scaling to future SOTA models (e.g., with trillions or tens-of-trillions of parameters) more affordable compared to approaches that fit the entire model into GPU memory.

> ZeRO-Inference delivers efficient computation for throughput-oriented inference applications despite the latency of fetching model weights from CPU or NVMe over PCIe interconnect. The primary reason for this is that by limiting GPU memory usage of the model to one or a few layers of weights, ZeRO-Inference can use the majority of GPU memory to support a large amount of input tokens in the form of long sequences or large batch sizes.  A large model layer requires a significant amount of computation, especially when processing inputs with many input tokens. For example, one GPT3-175B layer requires about 7 TFlops to process an input of batch size 1 and sequence length of 2048. Therefore, for inference scenarios with long sequence length and large batch sizes, the computation time dominates the latency of fetching model weights, which ultimately improves efficiency. In summary, ZeRO-Inference's strategy to utilize GPU memory to support large number of input tokens results in high performance inference for large models. In addition, ZeRO-Inference leverages two other optimizations to reduce the latency for fetching model layers and improve overall system efficiency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ZeRO-Inference delivers efficient computation for throughput-oriented inference applications despite the latency of fetching model weights from CPU or NVMe over PCIe interconnect. The primary reason for this is that by limiting GPU memory usage of the model to one or a few layers of weights, ZeRO-Inference can use the majority of GPU memory to support a large amount of input tokens in the form of long sequences or large batch sizes.  A large model layer requires a significant amount of computation, especially when processing inputs with many input tokens. For example, one GPT3-175B layer requires about 7 TFlops to process an input of batch size 1 and sequence length of 2048. Therefore, for inference scenarios with long sequence lengths and large batch sizes, the computation time dominates the latency of fetching model weights, which ultimately improves efficiency. In summary, ZeRO-Inference's strategy to utilize GPU memory to support large number of input tokens results in high performance inference for large models. In addition, ZeRO-Inference leverages two other optimizations to reduce the latency for fetching model layers and improve overall system efficiency.
```

Author: Good point. I think it makes sense to delete the sentence in the earlier paragraph.

Author: > perhaps moving that "benefit" of slow compute to until after pre-fetch is discussed?

I agree but it is not clear in my head how to do this. I will think a bit more and probably sync with you.

Reviewer: a simple re-org of the existing text should do - just moving the pre-fetch benefit declaration after pre-fetch is defined :)

### Alternative approach: Host some model weights in GPU memory

> An alternative approach to ZeRO-Inference is to pin as much of the model weights as possible into GPU memory and fetch the remainder (from CPU or NVMe) when needed for computation. A benefit of this approach is avoidance of the latency of fetching weights that are already pinned in GPU memory. However, this approach has two downsides: (i) the latency savings for hundred-billion parameter models are negligible since only a small fraction of the weights can fit in GPU memory, and (ii) even when a decent portion of the model weights (e.g., > 50%) can fit (e.g., smaller models with tens-of-billion parameters), the remaining GPU memory only supports small batch sizes which hurts inference throughput. We later show evaluation results to demonstrate that this approach is sub-optimal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An alternative approach to ZeRO-Inference is to pin as many of the model weights as possible into GPU memory and fetch the remainder (from CPU or NVMe) when needed for computation. A benefit of this approach is avoidance of the latency of fetching weights that are already pinned in GPU memory. However, this approach has two downsides: (i) the latency savings for hundred-billion parameter models are negligible since only a small fraction of the weights can fit in GPU memory, and (ii) even when a decent portion of the model weights (e.g., > 50%) can fit (e.g., smaller models with tens-of-billion parameters), the remaining GPU memory can only fit small batch sizes which hurts inference throughput. We later show evaluation results to demonstrate that this approach is sub-optimal.
```

Reviewer: I'd also massage those double "e.g." in a row - doesn't read easy - I'd combine into a single e.g.:

> even when a decent portion of the model weights can fit (e.g., >50% for ~10B models), the remaining GPU memory ...

Author: Done

## Model Scaling on 1 GPU

> ZeRO-Inference enables significant model scaling for inference on a single GPU compared to a PyTorch baseline. As an example, we consider half-precision model inference using a single NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPU in a NVIDIA DGX2 system. While the V100 GPU has 32GB of memory, the system is equipped with 1.5TB of CPU DRAM and 30TB of NVMe storage. The maximum model size supported for inference computation on GPU depends on the memory in which the model is hosted. *Figure 1* below shows the achievable model scales in this system for GPU inference using PyTorch and ZeRO-Inference. PyTorch hosts the model in GPU memory (i.e., HBM), and so cannot support models larger than 16 billion parameters for GPU inference[^model_scale] . In contrast, ZeRO-Inference has the flexibility to host the model in a different memory (DRAM or NVMe) than HBM. This flexibility allows ZeRO-Inference to support much larger models than PyTorch.  For example, by hosting a model on NVMe memory, Zero-Inference can support models with up to 15 trillion parameters for GPU inference, which is almost a thousand times larger compared to PyTorch. A practical takeaway from *Figure 1* is that ZeRO-Inference enables single GPU inference computation of current SOTA models, since they are smaller than 15 trillion parameters.

Author: Good point.  I will drop mention of PyTorch here since both baseline and ZeRO-Inference are PyTorch based.

![Full-offload](/assets/images/zero_inference_full_offload.png){: .align-center}

[^partial_offload]: Pinning more parameters in GPU memory resulted in out of memory errors for small batch sizes.

### Prefetching layer weights

> ZeRO-Inference fetches layers ahead of use, overlapping with current layer computation, to hide layer transfer latency. We measure the impact of prefetching on token generation performance for both OPT-30B and OPT-175B models on a single V100-32GB and summarize the results in *Table 2*. We observe that prefetching did not improve CPU offload. This is because the relatively short sequences in token generation (i.e., less than 50 tokens) resulted in layer computation time that is insufficient to hide a significant portion of layer fetch time from CPU.  In contrast, prefetching improves NVMe offloading performance by 1.13x and 1.14x for OPT-30B and OPT-175B respectively.  This is because transferring weights from NVMe through CPU memory allows prefetching to overlap transfers from CPU to GPU memory with transfers from NVMe to CPU boosting the effective transfer bandwidth.

Author: This is fair point. Since we are measuring token generation/second, the number of generated tokens is irrelevant since each token requires a full forward pass anyways.

> ZeRO-Inference fetches layers ahead of use, overlapping with current layer computation, to hide layer transfer latency. We measure the impact of prefetching on token generation performance for both OPT-30B and OPT-175B models on a single V100-32GB and summarize the results in *Table 2*. We observe that prefetching did not improve CPU offload. This is because the relatively short sequences in token generation (i.e., less than 50 tokens) resulted in layer computation time that is insufficient to hide a significant portion of layer fetch time from CPU.  In contrast, prefetching improves NVMe offloading performance by 1.13x and 1.14x for OPT-30B and OPT-175B respectively.  This is because transferring weights from NVMe through CPU memory allows prefetching to overlap transfers from CPU to GPU memory with transfers from NVMe to CPU boosting the effective transfer bandwidth.

Reviewer: it does make a difference to the throughput. Due to previous token caching the longer the sequence then less of a batch size one can fit and thus the lower the throughput.

> ZeRO-Inference fetches layers ahead of use, overlapping with current layer computation, to hide layer transfer latency. We measure the impact of prefetching on token generation performance for both OPT-30B and OPT-175B models on a single V100-32GB and summarize the results in *Table 2*. We observe that prefetching did not improve CPU offload. This is because the relatively short sequences in token generation (i.e., less than 50 tokens) resulted in layer computation time that is insufficient to hide a significant portion of layer fetch time from CPU.  In contrast, prefetching improves NVMe offloading performance by 1.13x and 1.14x for OPT-30B and OPT-175B respectively.  This is because transferring weights from NVMe through CPU memory allows prefetching to overlap transfers from CPU to GPU memory with transfers from NVMe to CPU boosting the effective transfer bandwidth.

Author: Done
